♪ [orchestral music--
string introduction] ♪
♪
♪ [slow, melodic
harp continuo] ♪
♪ [with oboe playing
the melody] ♪
♪♪
♪ [full orchestra] ♪
♪ [music
increases in intensity] ♪
♪♪
[soft flapping sounds]
[steady splashing]
(newsman)
BY WIRELESS FROM THE BBC,
HER MAJESTY, THE QUEEN
OF THE NETHERLANDS.
(The Queen)
FELLOW HOLLANDERS,
THE LIGHTS HAVE GONE OUT
OVER FREE HOLLAND.
WHERE ONLY TWO WEEKS AGO
THERE WAS A FREE NATION
OF MEN AND WOMEN
BROUGHT UP IN
THE CHERISHED TRADITION
OF CHRISTIAN CIVILIZATION,
THERE IS NOW THE STILLNESS
OF DEATH.
OPPRESSED. . .
THREATENED. . .
WATCHED ON
EVERY SIDE
BY A POWER THAT WOULD TEAR OUT
ALL HOPE FROM THE SOUL OF MAN.
THE UNHAPPY PEOPLE
OF HOLLAND
CAN ONLY PRAY
IN SILENCE.
FOR THOSE WHO HAVE
LOST THEIR VOICE
BUT NOT THEIR HOPE
OR THEIR VISION
IN THE STRUGGLE AGAINST THE
ONSLAUGHT OF BARBARISM.
LONG LIVE THE NETHERLANDS!
♪ [orchestra plays
the Dutch National Anthem] ♪
♪
[click]
[woman clearing
her throat]
OH! COFFEE. . .
IN THE PARLOR.
[clanking of dishes]
(man in the distance)
ACHTUNG! ACHTUNG!
BY ORDER OF
THE REICH'S COMMISSIONER,
ALL CITIZENS ARE ORDERED
TO SURRENDER THEIR RADIOS
AND ALL OTHER
WIRELESS EQUIPMENT.
[many clocks ticking]
ACHTUNG! ACHTUNG!
BY ORDER OF
THE REICH'S COMMISSIONER,
ALL CITIZENS ARE ORDERED
TO SURRENDER THEIR RADIOS
AND ALL OTHER
WIRELESS EQUIPMENT.
[doorbell tinkling]
GOOD MORNING, MR. TEN BOOM.
I APOLOGIZE FOR THE INTRUSION.
THEY ARE COLLECTING ALL RADIOS.
(Papa Ten Boom)
I CAN SEE THAT.
(with disdain)
DUTCH POLICEMAN
ASSISTING THEM!
WE DO WHAT
WE MUST.
[doorbell tinkling]
ALL CITIZENS ARE ORDERED TO
SURRENDER THEIR RADIOS
A RADIO, YES?
UPSTAIRS. . .
IN THE PARLOR!
GET IT.
YOU HAVE MANY
BEAUTIFUL CLOCKS HERE.
BAVARIAN?
THE CABINET LOOKS AS IF
IT'S A BERRINGER WORKS.
(Papa Ten Boom)
YEAH, 1886.
YOU KNOW WATCHES. . .
CLOCKS?
MY FATHER IS A WATCHMAKER.
I GREW UP UNDER HIS WORKBENCH.
AND LOOK WHAT
YOU'VE GROWN INTO.
WHAT DISTRICT?
MATTENBRAW.
AH, MATTENBRAW. . .
MATTENBRAW, 1895.
MAGNIFICENT.
BUT YOU SHOULD HAVE SEEN
THAT WATCH WHEN IT CAME IN.
THE WAY SOME PEOPLE
TREAT A WATCH--NO CARE. . .
NO. . .UNDERSTANDING.
IT WAS A GIFT
ON MY 70TH BIRTHDAY.
"TO GRANDPA TEN BOOM FROM
THE CHILDREN OF HAARLEM.
26TH OF MARCH, 1935."
GIVE HIM THE HORN.
(German soldier)
ANY OTHER RADIOS IN THE HOUSE?
NO! NONE!
GOOD DAY, THEN.
[doorbell tinkling]
[low, resonant ring
of large bell]
♪ [orchestra plays
in minor tones] ♪
♪
(woman)
I DON'T WANT
ANYTHING TOO EXPENSIVE.
(Betsie)
THEN THERE'S
THIS ONE. . .
SEVEN JEWELS
IN A SWISS FACTORY
BUT ALL THE CRAFTSMEN
ARE GERMAN IMMIGRANTS!
IT'S 42 GUILDERS.
(woman)
IT'S FOR AN ANNIVERSARY.
WE COULD SPEND
A LITTLE MORE.
WELL, THERE'S
THIS ONE. . .
BAMENDOR WORKS.
EXCUSE ME.
PAPA, ARE YOU
GOING OUT?
[tap, tap, tap]
I WILL NOT DODDER
AROUND THIS HOUSE
AND DO NOTHING.
PAPA?
[doorbell tinkles]
EXCUSE ME. . .
I'M SORRY.
(voice trembling slightly)
AH, YES. . .
YOU SEE, YOU COULD
HAVE IT ENGRAVED
OR YOU COULD ORDER
IT IN AH, A WHITE GOLD.
THE WHITE GOLD IS 60.
(man on P.A.)
. . .RESIDING IN
THE OCCUPIED NETHERLANDS
MUST COME FORWARD ACCORDING
TO THE FOLLOWING REGULATIONS.
A PERSON IS CONSIDERED
BEING. . .
(man)
TAKE YOUR STAR.
. . .A JEW OR PART JEW
NEXT.
IF HE HAS AT LEAST
ONE GRANDPARENT
WHO IS ORIGINALLY
A FULL JEW.
A GRANDPARENT IS
CONSIDERED A JEW
IF HE BELONGS OR HAS BELONGED TO
THE JEWISH CHURCH.
♪ [orchestra plays slowly
in minor tones] ♪
YOU SHOULDN'T BE HERE.
I'VE COME
FOR MY STAR.
THEY ARE FOR JEWS.
YOU DON'T HAVE A "J"
ON YOUR IDENTITY CARD.
YOU COULD
GET IT FOR ME.
IF WE ALL WEAR THEM,
THEY WOULDN'T KNOW
THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN
A GENTILE AND A JEW.
GO HOME PLEASE. . .
GO HOME.
I WILL WEAR MY STAR!
AND I WON'T TAKE IT OFF UNTIL
GOD TELLS ME TO TAKE IT OFF!
THE GOD OF ABRAHAM
AND ISAAC
AND MY GOD, TOO!
WHOSE LEADER?
[smashing of glass]
[loud tinkling]
HURRY, QUICK.
TURN AROUND!
GOOD MORNING. . .
[loud tinkling]
ISN'T IT MISS TEN BOOM?
CHILDREN, STOP.
THE WATCHMAKER'S SHOP?
[loud tinkling]
TEN BOOM, BERTELJORISSTRAAT!
YAH! YOU CAME
FOR OUR RADIO.
I WROTE TO MY FATHER.
I TOLD HIM
ABOUT YOUR SHOP.
WHO ARE THOSE BOYS?
WHY ARE THEY BEING ALLOWED
TO TORMENT THAT MAN?
THEY ARE YOUNG
DUTCH PATRIOTS.
HE WAS HEARD TO MAKE
PUBLIC STATEMENTS
DEROGATORY TO THE REICH
AND OUR FUHRER.
THEY ARE EXPRESSING
THEIR INDIGNATION.
PATRIOTS?
WHO ARE THESE CHILDREN?
I TEACH A CLASS.
I TELL THEM ABOUT GOD.
AT LEAST, I USED TO.
THIS WILL BE THE LAST ONE.
THANKS TO YOUR NEW DIRECTIVE
CONCERNING
UNAUTHORIZED MEETINGS.
MISS TEN BOOM. . .
THE MEASURES ARE TEMPORARY.
ONCE ALL THIS IS OVER, WHEN
ORDER HAS BEEN RESTORED,
THEN ALL THE ARYAN PEOPLES
WILL LIVE TOGETHER
AS BROTHERS IN OUR REICH.
MEN LIVE TOGETHER AS BROTHERS
ONLY IN THE KINGDOM
OF OUR LORD. . .
NOWHERE ELSE.
MAY WE GO?
COME. . .YEAH.
[loud smashing
and tinkling]
[loud smashing]
[girls giggling]
[baa of sheep]
(Corrie)
CHILDREN. . .
COME!
SOME COOKIES.
AH, YEAH, JAN COMES
RUNNING FOR THE COOKIES.
[birds chirping]
LISA, YEAH.
ARNOLD. . .OH YEAH!
HA! COOKIES?
AHA!
I. . .I MAY NOT BE ABLE TO
BE WITH YOU FOR A WHILE.
YES?
AHH. . .BUT JESUS WILL
STILL BE THERE. . .
ALWAYS WATCHING OVER YOU.
[duck quacking]
YOU SEE. . .WITHOUT JESUS,
WE ARE LIKE THIS. . .
EMPTY!
WE CAN DO NOTHING.
BUT THEN JESUS FILLS US
WITH HIS LOVE.
[giggling]
THEN WE ARE FULL. . .
YEAH!
WE CAN DO ANYTHING. . .
WE CAN DO ANYTHING!
NOTHING SERIOUS, PASTOR.
A LITTLE BIT DIRT MAYBE.
IT'S BEEN LOSING
5 SECONDS A DAY.
MAYBE A
GOOD CLEANING
UM-HUM. . .YOU
CAN DO IT NOW?
WHILE I'M HERE. . .IT REALLY
WOULD BE MOST HELPFUL.
YEAH!
GOOD!
I'LL GO UP AND HAVE
A CHAT WITH YOUR PAPA.
I HEAR HE'S BEEN WEARING
A JEWISH STAR.
STUBBORNNESS IS
THE CHILD OF PRIDE
AND PRIDE IS THE FIRST
OF THE SEVEN DEADLY SINS.
I'LL SPEAK TO HIM ABOUT IT.
OH, I NEED TO THE BACK
AT THE CHURCH BY 1:30.
IT WILL BE READY.
[doorbell tinkling]
DR. HEEMSTRA!
MISS TEN BOOM.
I CAN ONLY STAY
FOR A MOMENT.
[Corrie gasps]
OH. . .OH!
[baby cries]
OH, WE NEED MILK
FOR HIM, NOT SOUP.
GOOD LORD, YOU DON'T
INTEND TO KEEP IT.
BUT YOU CAN'T!!
IT'S ILLEGAL!
[baby cooing]
YOU COULD ALL BE ARRESTED.
HE'S BEAUTIFUL.
PASTOR. . .
THE LORD MUST HAVE
SENT YOU HERE.
YOU LIVE IN THE
COUNTRY.
NOTHING COULD BE
SAFER.
IT'S. . .IMPOSSIBLE.
I-I. . .HAVE MY OWN
FAMILY TO THINK OF.
WE COULD LOSE EVERYTHING
FOR THAT CHILD.
WHERE WOULD MY CHURCH BE
W-WITHOUT A SHEPHERD.
OH, BUT. . .
NO, BETSIE!
THE PASTOR HAS DECIDED.
IT IS THE LAW!
AND CHRISTIANS MUST
OBEY THE LAW!
THINK WHAT YOU ARE RISKING
FOR THE SAKE OF
ONE JEWISH BABY.
(Corrie)
WILL YOU REPORT US PASTOR,
IF THE BABY MUST
STAY A WHILE WITH US?
CORRIE. . .WE ARE MEANT TO
OBEY THE LAW OF THE STATE,
IF IT DOES NOT GO AGAINST
A HIGHER LAW OF GOD.
[baby softly cooing]
PASTOR, YOU WANT ME
TO TAKE OFF MY STAR.
VERY WELL,
I WILL NOT WEAR IT.
AND WE WILL KEEP THE CHILD!
[baby cooing]
AS A CHRISTIAN. . .
I AM SORRY THAT
ANY MAN MUST SUFFER
NO MATTER WHO HE IS. . .
OR WHAT HIS RACE.
BUT REMEMBER,
IT IS THE JEWS. . .
(Papa)
WHO GAVE US THE BIBLE. . .
AND OUR SAVIOR!
[baby cooing]
IT IS ON YOUR HEADS.
I'LL PICK UP MY WATCH TOMORROW.
[baby cooing]
GOOD DAY, TEN BOOM.
LADIES.
[click]
GOD FORGIVE HIM.
HE DID NOT
MEAN IT.
HOW CAN THAT MAN
CALL HIMSELF A
CHRISTIAN?
IF A MOUSE LIVES
IN THE COOKIE JAR,
THAT DOESN'T NECESSARILY
MAKE HIM A COOKIE.
[Betsie chuckles]
WHAT WILL WE DO?
WE MUST HAVE
MILK.
HE SHOULD GO
TO THE COUNTRY.
CAREFUL, HE'LL
SUFFOCATE.
WHERE WILL YOU SEND HIM?
GOD WILL KNOW.
DOORS ARE OPENING
ALL OVER HOLLAND.
LAST WEEK WE HAD
A DUTCH FARM GIRL
AND A PRUSSIAN BARONESS
IN THE SAME BED.
[baby cooing]
AND NOW YOU'LL HAVE A
LITTLE MOSES IN THE BASKET.
[scraping of metal
on glass]
CORRIE, PLEASE.
THANK YOU.
[baby cooing]
(Corrie)
WILLEM!
(Willem)
HE MUST NOT CRY!
(Corrie)
YOU CERTAINLY ARE ORGANIZED.
OH, IT'S NOT
THE FIRST TIME.
[baby cooing]
WE ARE A WAY STATION. . .
FOR A DAY OR
FOR A WEEK.
YOU'VE KEPT THIS FROM US,
WILLEM?
GERMAN JEWS BEFORE THE
OCCUPATION AND NOW THE DUTCH.
WE DO WHAT WE CAN
BUT THE NAZIS WILL NOT
BE SATISFIED
UNTIL THERE'S NOT
A JEW LEFT IN EUROPE.
THEY HAVE TOUCHED
THE APPLE OF GOD'S EYE.
I PITY THEM!
I HATE THEM.
OH, CORRIE. . .
YOU CAN'T HATE ANYONE
AND WALK WITH THE LORD.
YOU COULD HAVE TOLD US, WILLEM,
WE MIGHT HAVE HELPED.
(Willem)
THE IMPORTANT THING IS TO GET
OUR LITTLE FRIEND OUT OF HERE.
YOU'D BE HARD PRESSED TO EXPLAIN
A SUDDEN GIFT FROM HEAVEN.
SON, I'LL WALK WITH YOU
A LITTLE WAY.
GOODBYE, MOSES.
WE'VE BEEN MANAGING
ALL RIGHT
SOME POTATOES. . .
AND OCCASIONALLY EGGS, EVEN!
SO FAR WE HAVEN'T
DONE TOO BADLY.
[bicycle bell rings]
AND OF COURSE WE. . .
[clicking of bicycle wheels]
IS THIS THE
DUTCH FARM GIRL?
(male voice)
GRANDPA!
KIK, DID YOU GET
ANYTHING?
THE CARBON FROM
THE WASTEBASKET--
IF YOU HOLD IT UP TO
THE LIGHT, YOU CAN JUST
MAKE IT OUT.
THANK YOU.
YOU SEE, PAPA,
WE HAVE A CONTACT
IN THE GESTAPO
OFFICE.
HUSH!!
HE GIVES US THE
DEPORTATION LISTS
WHENEVER HE CAN.
ALL RIGHT, KIK!
UH-HUH.
GOOD-BYE, GRANDPA.
GOD BLESS YOU, KIK.
STEADY IT WITH
ONE HAND. . .GOOD!
[birds singing]
PAPA. . .
EVERY DAY NOW. . .
THEY SEND 400 JEWS FROM
AMSTERDAM CENTRAL STATION.
WE REACH THOSE WE CAN.
DO WE KNOW ANYONE
ON THE LIST?
♪ [cello plays slow,
intense, minor melody] ♪
♪♪
(soldier)
GEWASSEN!
STEINWEINEN!
[yelling]
[soldiers shouting
commands]
♪
SCHLOSS! SCHLOSS!
[click]
I BEG YOUR PARDON.
NO, PLEASE,
I. . .I'M SORRY. . .
TO. . .TO INCONVENIENCE YOU.
[click]
MAYBE HE'S A. . .
PAPA. . .
THERE'S A GENTLEMAN UPSTAIRS.
WE HAVE MET.
WELL, IT WAS SO
LATE. . .
HE HAD NO PLACE TO GO
PAPA, HE'S A
PROFESSOR.
WILLEM STUDIED
WITH HIM.
THEY'VE CLOSED
THE UNIVERSITY.
ALL THE JEWISH TEACHERS
WERE FORCED. . .
AH, BETSIE. . .
GOOD MORNING AGAIN, PROFESSOR.
I APOLOGIZE FOR THE INTRUSION
MR.TEN BOOM.
PLEASE. . .
THANK YOU.
PROFESSOR. . .
WILL YOU DO US THE HONOR
OF ASKING THE BLESSING?
[in Hebrew]
BLESSED ART THOU,
OH LORD, OUR GOD,
WHO BRINGEST FORTH BREAD
FROM THE EARTH.
AMEN.
(all)
[sighs]
AH! HOW FORTUNATE
AUNT BEP HAD BIG FEET.
(with mixed
blessing) YES.
HM. . .
OH. . .
NOW, WHEN WERE
YOU BORN?
BORN?
UMMM.
OH. . .
AH, 19TH AUGUST, 1885.
FATHER'S NAME?
TEN BOOM, CASPER.
MOTHER?
TEN BOOM, CORNELIA.
HER MAIDEN NAME?
MISS TEN BOOM,
IF WE ARE STOPPED, I. . .
I COULD NEVER PASS AS YOU.
PROFESSOR ZIENER. . .
THERE ARE NO "IFs"
IN GOD'S WORLD.
NOW, HE BROUGHT YOU
TO THIS HOUSE,
AND HE WILL SEE
YOU GET SAFELY AWAY.
♪ [harpsichord, flute,
and viola] ♪
(Corrie)
THIS IS WHERE WE TURN,
PROFESSOR.
STAY CLOSE WITH ME.
I'LL TRY.
♪
(Corrie)
IT'S WONDERFUL PROFESSOR!
WE'RE ALMOST THERE.
♪
(Corrie)
KATRIEN.
AUNT CORRIE!
♪
AUNT CORRIE.
KATRIEN,
I NEED YOUR
FATHER'S HELP.
(Corrie)
YOU SHOULD HAVE SEEN PROFESSOR
ZIENER GETTING INTO THE BOAT.
KATRIEN'S FATHER ATTENDING HIM
LIKE HE WAS
QUEEN WILHELMINA
BOARDING THE YACHT!
[women chuckle]
CORNELIA, DO YOU THINK WE ARE
ENJOYING THIS A LITTLE TOO MUCH?
ENJOYING?
NO, I WAS
TERRIFIED.
IF I HADN'T BEEN
ABLE TO LAUGH AT
HIM
ALL DRESSED UP
LIKE BETSIE
OH! THANK GOD.
HE KEPT THE PATROLS AWAY.
BE SURE TO SAVE A PIECE OF CAKE
FOR WILLEM'S FRIEND.
FRIEND?
IT'S ALL
VERY MYSTERIOUS.
SOMEONE HE WANTS
US TO MEET.
WHAT DID WILLEM SAY WHEN YOU
TOLD HIM ABOUT PROFESSOR ZIENER?
THIS IS NOT SOME GAME
YOU PLAY WHEN THE MOOD STRIKES.
IF YOU BECOME INVOLVED
IN THIS WORK,
PEOPLE WILL BE FORCED
TO TRUST YOU. . .
WITH THEIR LIVES!
I TOLD YOU, WILLEM.
WE GAVE HIM
MY PAPERS.
WE THOUGHT IT OUT
VERY CAREFULLY.
AND IF THEY
QUESTIONED HIM. . .
WAS HE SUPPOSED TO
SING SOPRANO?
NO. . .HE WAS GOING
TO HAVE. . .QUINCY THROAT.
EXCUSE ME.
YOU WANDER ALONG THE CANAL
PICKING SOMEONE OUT OF THIN AIR
HOW DID YOU KNOW
YOU COULD TRUST HIM?
I KNEW THE MAN.
AND I KNEW WHAT
THE LORD HAD TOLD
ME.
PAPA. . .
YOU ARE THE MASTER OF THIS
HOUSE.
THE MASTER
OF THIS HOUSE. . .
COMMANDS THAT WE OPEN THE DOOR
TO ANYONE WHO KNOCKS.
(Mr. Sluring)
WE CANNOT AFFORD TO IGNORE
ANYONE
WHO SERIOUSLY ENGAGES IN OUR
WORK, WHATEVER THEIR METHODS.
PERHAPS YOU WILL ALLOW US
TO. . .ASSIST YOUR EFFORTS.
[roar of engines
far in the distance]
[clunking of cart]
[roar becomes louder]
[very loud roar]
[clatter]
[roar of engine
fades into distance]
[doorbell tinkling]
[clunk]
THANK YOU FOR
THE DELIVERY, MR. SMIT.
[many clocks ticking]
[clunk]
ONLY FOR EMERGENCIES!
WE HAVE A CONTACT AT THE
EXCHANGE,
BUT YOU CAN NEVER BE CERTAIN
THAT THE LINE IS NOT TAPPED.
BUT YOU WILL BE EXPECTED
TO DEVELOP YOUR OWN SOURCES.
THE LESS CONTACT
YOU HAVE WITH ME,
OR WITH ANYONE ELSE. . .
THE BETTER.
WILLEM, WE KNOW
HALF OF HAARLEM.
WE HAVE FRIENDS EVERYWHERE!
(Mr. Sluring)
DEAR LADY, KNOWING THEM
IS ONE THING. . .
KNOWING THEIR
POLITICAL VIEWS. . .
GOD KNOWS!
AND WE WILL ASK HIM TO LEAD.
OH, WE APPRECIATE YOUR
CONCERN, MR. SLURING.
[many clocks ticking]
WE ARE NOT THE MOST
LIKELY CANDIDATES.
BUT SINCE THERE IS A NEED.
WE MUST DO WHAT
WE CAN TO MEET IT.
PEOPLE HAVE EVERY KIND OF REASO
FOR WANTING TO WORK
IN THE UNDERGROUND
EXCITEMENT, PERHAPS.
[both chuckle]
MR. SLURING,
WE ARE PAST THE AGE
WHEN EXCITEMENT IS
OF ANY MAJOR CONCERN
IN OUR LIVES.
TRUTHFULLY. . .I'D
RATHER DO ANYTHING ELSE.
I'D LIKE TO CLOSE THE DOOR
AND NEVER OPEN IT AGAIN
UNTIL THIS WHOLE
HIDEOUS THING IS OVER.
BUT, THAT'S ME.
MY LORD JESUS TELLS ME
TO OPEN THE DOOR
TO WHATEVER COMES.
TO GIVE HIS LOVE
IN WHATEVER WAY
I CAN.
AND I WILL LISTEN
TO HIS VOICE. . .
NOT MINE.
[many clocks ticking]
DO WE PASS
INSPECTION?
[ticking]
HOW MANY CAN YOU TAKE?
THERE'S AH, MAMA'S ROOM
AND THERE'S YOUR OLD ROOM,
AND THERE'S AUNT ANNA'S ROOM
AND AUNTIE BEP'S ROOM,
AND OUR 3 ROOMS--THAT'S 7.
AND WE CAN SHARE
A BED IF WE HAVE
TO.
SO! OUR HOTEL IS
READY FOR GUESTS.
NOT QUITE.
WHAT DO YOU DO
IF THE GESTAPO COMES?
[ticking]
YOU WILL HAVE A VISITOR,
A JAN SMIT.
ACTUALLY, IT'S TWO HOUSES.
OVER A HUNDRED YEARS AGO
THEY WERE JOINED TOGETHER.
THE ONE IN THE FRONT IS
2 ROOMS DEEP
AND ONE ROOM WIDE.
THE ONE AT THE BACK,
HERE, IS 3 ROOMS:
ONE ON TOP OF THE OTHER.
PAPA!
THIS IS MR. SMIT.
MR. SMIT.
I KNOW SOME SMITS
IN AMSTERDAM.
ARE YOU WITH THE SMIT FAMILY
THAT MAKES THE CANDY?
FATHER, THIS IS THE MAN
THAT I TOLD YOU ABOUT.
HE'S COME TO
INSPECT THE HOUSE.
OH! A BUILDING INSPECTOR?
DO YOU HAVE THE OFFICES
ON GROTE HOUS STREET?
NO, PAPA.
HE IS NOT A BUILDING INSPECTOR,
AND HIS NAME IS NOT SMIT.
NOT SMIT?
EXCUSE US, PAPA.
WE MUST LOOK AT
THE REST OF THE HOUSE.
(Corrie)
THE PARLOR. . .
MEALTIMES-- THAT'S
A FAVORITE HOUR FOR A RAID.
WATCH YOUR WASTEBASKETS. . .
AND ASHTRAYS.
WE NEED TO BE AS HIGH
AS POSSIBLE.
IT ALLOWS FOR THE BEST CHANCE
TO REACH A SAFE PLACE
WHILE THEY SEARCH BELOW.
THESE ARE ALL BEDROOMS?
YEAH.
IF A RAID COMES AT NIGHT,
THEY'LL HAVE TO
TAKE THEIR BEDDING,
BUT MAKE CERTAIN
THE MATTRESS GETS TURNED.
A FAVORITE TRICK OF THE GESTAPO
FEELING FOR A WARM SPOT
ON THE BED.
WHAT'S UP THERE?
[click]
AH-HA!
THE ROOF IS DIRECTLY ABOVE.
WHO SLEEPS HERE?
I DO.
PERFECT!!
[click!]
[click]
THE WALL. . .
WILL GO. . .HERE!
[loud splashing]
ALL CLEAR! THE SIGN'S
IN THE WINDOW.
[loud splashing]
YOU SEE, THERE IS
A DISTINCTIVE MARKING--
YOU CAN ALWAYS TELL
FLENSTADHT WORK.
PETER!
LOVELY DAY,
AUNT BETSIE.
PETER!
NO, NO.
I'LL COME FOR IT
TUESDAY THEN.
GOOD.
AH! HERR TEN BOOM!
FRIESSIAN!
SUCH BEAUTIFUL WOOD!
MY FATHER MADE A CASE
LIKE THIS ONCE.
OH, HE SPENT MONTHS BUILDING IT,
POLISHING. . .OILING.
IT AH. . .IS JUST A SHELL. . .
IT NEEDS
A COMPLETE SET OF WORKS.
WHAT PRICE WILL YOU BE ASKING?
WELL, IT WILL TAKE
SOME MONTHS TO BE READY.
NAME A GOOD PRICE.
EXORBITANT, EVEN,
I'LL PAY.
I LIKE THE CLOCK.
I CAN AFFORD THE BEST!
BUT IT, IT HAS NO WORKS.
NONE.
VERY WELL.
TUESDAY, HERR TEN BOOM.
[bell tinkles]
[grunting]
KIK!
HURRY!
[door slams]
(very firmly)
AUNT BETSIE, HOW MANY TIMES
DO YOU HAVE TO BE TOLD
TAKE THE SIGN OUT OF THE WINDOW
WHEN IT ISN'T SAFE!!
OH, KIK, I'M SORRY.
I'M SORRY!!
GRANDPA. . .
LOOK!
(Corrie)
TEA MR. SMIT?
OH! DANKE!
[doorbell tinkling]
YES, YES, YES, YES!
GOOD MORNING.
MILK! WHERE
DID YOU GET. . .
NOT MILK. . .
PAINT!
PAINT?
(Corrie)
BETSIE! OH, BETSIE.
DO YOU REMEMBER
FRED KOONSTRA?
OF COURSE. . .
HE READ OUR
ELECTRIC METER FOR YEARS.
HIS DAUGHTER WAS
IN OUR BIBLE CLASS.
YEAH!. . .MILK!!!
PAINT.
PAINT! ELSIE KOONSTRA.
I KNOW HER NAME.
I JUST HAD TO SORT
OUT A FEW FACES.
SHE MUST BE IN HER
TWENTIES BY NOW.
(Corrie)
I HEARD YESTERDAY THAT FRED
KOONSTRA WORKS AT THE FOOD
OFFICE.
WHERE?
(Corrie)
THEY ISSUE RATION CARDS.
[bird singing]
I WILL BE FRANK.
WE'VE HAD SOME UNEXPECTED
COMPANY.
FIRST, A BABY. . .
THEN A MAN. . .
AND NOW LAST NIGHT, A COUPLE.
ALL JEWS, MR. KOONSTRA.
WHY DO YOU TELL ME?
THERE ARE ONLY THREE
OF US LEFT AT HOME NOW--
MY FATHER, MY SISTER, AND ME,
AND OUR RATION CARDS
ARE JUST NOT ENOUGH.
ALL RATION CARDS ARE CHECKED.
ACCOUNTED FOR IN
A DOZEN DIFFERENT WAYS.
YEAH! YEAH! I. . .I KNOW.
I. . .
I SHOULD NOT HAVE ASKED YOU.
(sighs) I THOUGHT PERHAPS
YOU COULD ADVISE ME.
THE FOOD OFFICE AT UTRECHT
WAS ROBBED LAST WEEK.
THE MEN WERE CAUGHT
. . .AND SHOT.
(nervously)
IF IT HAPPENED
AT NOON,
WHEN JUST THE RECORD CLERK
AND I WERE THERE. . .
WE'D HAVE TO BE
TIED AND GAGGED.
HOW MANY CARDS DO YOU NEED?
A HUNDRED!
I KNOW SOMEONE WHO MIGHT DO IT.
[click]
[bird singing]
[cat meows]
PAPA! NOW!!
PAPA!
[loud buzzing]
[clattering]
[click]
DONE.
(Corrie)
HOW LONG?
47 SECONDS!
THEY BETTER NOT SEND US
ANYONE WIDER THAN ME.
HALLELUJAH!
OUR LORD, WE ASK YOUR BLESSING
ON THIS HIDING PLACE.
[people laughing]
(Papa)
YOU EAT WHAT YOU LIKE!
HERREN, IT IS NOT KOSHER.
IT'S NOT IMPORTANT.
(woman)
WOULD YOU PASS
THE POTATOES, PLEASE?
[loud buzzing]
GO, GO! GO!
[clattering]
(Corrie)
HURRY, HURRY.
(Papa)
. . .ONE AT THE HEAD,
ONE AT THE FOOT,
ONE ON EACH SIDE.
[clattering of utensils]
(Corrie)
YOU'RE SPILLING IT!
[chuckling]
[clattering]
[chattering]
[Papa sighs]
(Papa)
CORRIE?
ONE MINUTE
AND 15 SECONDS.
AH!
IT'S LONG ENOUGH
TO CURDLE THE STOMACH.
[knocking]
[louder knocking]
(man)
PEACE BE WITH THIS HOUSE
AND ALL THAT DWELL WITHIN IT.
THE PEACE OF THE LORD GOD. . .
GET INSIDE!
YOU STAND OUTSIDE
AND PRAY.
(demanding tone)
I WAS TOLD YOU HAD
ACCOMMODATIONS.
I WILL REQUIRE A ROOM TO MYSELF
QUIET FOR STUDY,
PREFERABLY WITH NO CHILDREN.
WELL, CAN YOU TAKE ME IN?
WELL, YES. . .
GOOD.
. . .I SUPPOSE SO, BUT THERE ARE
MANY QUESTIONS THAT I. . .
I WOULD LIKE
SOMETHING TO EAT.
THE LAST MEAL WAS YESTERDAY--
THANK YOU--AT NOON.
THIS IS A KOSHER HOUSE?
WELL, WE TRY.
WE HAVE MANY REQUESTS
THAT WE'RE NOT ABLE TO FILL.
THERE ARE
NO CHILDREN?
WELL, NOT
AT PRESENT,
BUT THEY COME
AND THEY GO.
LET THEM STAY GONE
WHILE I AM HERE.
THIS THE WAY?
YEAH! BUT I WOULD FIRST LIKE
TO TALK TO YOU ABOUT. . .
MY CONTACTS HAVE TOLD ME THAT
MOSTOF YOUR QUESTS ARE TRANSIENT
THEY ARE ON THEIR WAY
OUT OF THE COUNTRY.
MOST OF THEM, YES.
WELL, I WILL NOT BE.
I'M A TEACHER
AND CHIEF CANTOR FOR
THE CONGREGATION BETH KODESH.
I WILL NOT BE DRIVEN AWAY
BY THESE GRINNING SIEGFREIDS
AND THEIR THOUSAND-YEAR REICH.
WHO IS THIS MAN?. . .
A PARTRIARCH LIKE ISAAC
OR JACOB,
FATHER OF NATIONS.
PAPA, WE HAVE
A NEW GUEST.
THIS IS MY FATHER,
MR. TEN BOOM.
PAPA, THIS IS MR. . .
WIJNSTOK,
MEYER WIJNSTOK.
PLEASED TO MEET YOU TEN BOOM.
GOD WILLING AND THE
ACCOMMODATIONS PROVING SUITABLE,
I WILL BE STAYING WITH YOU
UNTIL THIS NONSENSE IS OVER.
YOU ARE WELCOME.
THANK YOU.
MISS TEN BOOM, MY ROOM PLEASE.
[doorbell tinkling]
[click]
AUNT BETSIE!
OHH!!
MY FRIEND JAN NEEDS
A PLACE TO STAY FOR AWHILE.
OH!
HE GOT AWAY
FROM THE TRANSPORT.
BY NOON TOMORROW HE WILL HAVE
NEW IDENTITY PAPERS.
BUT. . .
WHERE DID YOU GET
THE UNIFORMS?
NOT ALL GERMANS ARE NAZIS,
AUNT BETSIE.
IS IT JAN?
CORRIE! MR. WIJNSTOK REFUSED
KITCHEN DUTY AGAIN.
HE HAS TO STUDY.
HE WANTS TO EAT, HE'S GOT
TO DO HIS SHARE OF THE WORK.
WHERE IS HE NOW?
IN THE PARLOR.
(woman)
OH CAN I HAVE. . .
OH, EXCUSE ME.
IT'S ALL RIGHT.
CORRIE, HE'S ALREADY
BEEN UPSET TODAY.
HE FOUND OUT WE CALL HIM
"EUSIE" BEHIND HIS BACK.
MAYBE IT'S HIS
GREAT DIGNITY.
HE SHOULD BE FLATTERED
HE REMINDS US OF A SCHOLAR!
BUT A GENTILE SCHOLAR.
HE SAID, "WE SHOULD HAVE
AT LEAST CALLED HIM JOSEPHUS."
RULES ARE RULES!
MR. WIJNSTOK, MY SISTER TELLS
ME THAT YOU HAVE REFUSED. . .
MISS TEN BOOM,
I AM PRAYING.
FIRST YOU REFUSED
TO WORK ON SATURDAY,
BECAUSE THAT WAS THE SABBATH.
THEN YOU REFUSED
TO WORK ON SUNDAY
BECAUSE THAT WAS
OUR DAY OF REST.
I WAS SIMPLY TRYING
TO PAY RESPECT
TO THE PRACTICE
OF THIS HOUSE.
BUT TODAY IS TUESDAY.
TELL ME, MISS TEN BOOM,
WHY YOU HAVE FOUND IT NECESSARY
TO GIVE ME A NICKNAME?
WE HAVE CALLED YOU
EUSIE SIMPLY BECAUSE. . .
EUSIE IS THE KIND OF A NAME
YOU WOULD GIVE TO A PET CAT.
AS A GUEST IN YOUR HOUSE, AM I
NO LONGER ENTITLED TO RESPECT?
WE ARE GETTING COMPLETELY
OFF THE SUBJECT.
HOWEVER, AS IT SEEMS
TO GIVE YOU BOTH SATISFACTION,
PLEASE HAVE THE COURAGE
TO USE THE NAME TO MY FACE.
IF YOU WANT EUSIE,
EUSIE IT WILL BE.
LADIES!
[clock ticking]
(Corrie)
GET UP!
AH, GOOD MORNING!
GOOD MORNING!
MORNING.
IT'S AFTER SEVEN.
CAN'T YOU SMELL BREAKFAST?
YEAH!
BETSIE! BETSIE. . .
OH, GOOD MORNING!
WHAT IS IT?
TODAY IS THE 18TH!
IT'S MAMA AND PAPA'S
ANNIVERSARY!
OH, NO.
54 COUPONS
FOR CREAM PUFFS.
TELL MR. KLASSEN IT'S FOR PAPA.
CORRIE. . .
CORRIE. . .THAT BLOUSE
AND THAT SKIRT. . .
YOU JUST CAN'T.
NOT TODAY.
BUT. . .
YOU'D LOOK LIKE
A FLAG ON A MUDBOAT.
BUT YOU ALWAYS
LIKED THIS BLOUSE.
THE BLOUSE IS BEAUTIFUL
AND YOU ARE BEAUTIFUL,
BUT THE COMBINATION OF YOU,
THE BLOUSE, AND THE SKIRT
IS IMPOSSIBLE.
HUH.
(woman singing)
♪ SAN-TA LU-CI-A ♪
♪ SANTA. . . LUCI. . .A ♪
[applause]
PAPA TEN BOOM, YOU ARE
A MOST SINGULAR MAN.
FOR SUCH A GREAT MAN,
THERE MUST HAVE BEEN
A GREAT WOMAN.
NOW THIS IS NOT
EXACTLY A SONG,
IT'S MORE A. . .
UM, A BLESSING.
IT'S, AH. . .IT MEANS
"MAY GOD BLESS YOU,
MAY HE PROTECT YOU,
AND MAY HIS FACE
SHINE UPON YOU."
♪ [singing loudly
in Hebrew] ♪
♪♪
[sings with more
resonance and volume]
♪♪
DO YOU WANT THE WHOLE
OF HAARLEM TO HEAR YOU?
I DID NOT ASK
TO BE BORN A JEW.
I AM SICK OF BEING
EXPECTED TO
BEAR THE BURDEN OF SUFFERING
FOR THE ENTIRE WORLD
BECAUSE MY MOTHER'S
NAME WAS. . .STEIN.
(shouting)
SO, YOU WILL BE ANOTHER ESAU,
SELLING YOUR BIRTHRIGHT
FOR A MESS OF PORRIDGE!!
I DON'T WANT YOUR
GREAT JUDAIC HERITAGE!
I DON'T WANT ANY PART
OF YOUR LORD GOD JEHOVAH.
(Papa)
IT IS NO EASY THING
TO STAND IN THE PALM
OF GOD'S HAND.
[doorbell tinkling]
[gasps]
BETSIE, GO GET THE DOOR.
BETSIE, GO!!
YES, YES I GO.
[doorbell tinkling]
OH. . .UM. . .
YES, IN A MOMENT!!
(from outside)
IT'S MRS. BEUKERS.
OH!!
BETSIE, ARE YOU CRAZY?
THE WHOLE STREET CAN HEAR
YOUR JEWS SINGING.
[gasps]
THANK YOU.
[click]
(newsman)
TONIGHT ON THE OVERSEAS SERVICE
OF THE BBC,
WE HAVE SPECIAL GREETINGS
AND LOVE TO 2017,
[Betsie whispering the numbers]
. . .PRIVATE SIDNEY HARRIS
FROM HIS MOTHER.
AND TO 1433, LANCE CORPORAL
PHILLIP MUNEN
FROM HIS WIFE, DORIS.
double three.
HAS ANYONE SEEN OR HEARD
OF ALAN STOKES WHO WAS
LAST HEARD OF IN BOURNMOUTH?
HIS FATHER IS IN THE HOSPITAL
IN LONDON AND DANGEROUSLY ILL.
WILL ALAN STOKES PLEASE CONTACT
GUYS HOSPITAL WHITEHALL 9527.
9527.
THAT NUMBER AGAIN
IS WHITEHALL 9527.
2-7.
THE NEXT PROGRAM IS
MUSIC PLAYED BY. . .
HOW CAN I EVER
REMEMBER THEM?
THE WAY WE USED TO
PASS MESSAGES IN CHURCH.
[gulls squawking]
♪ [cello plays
in somber tone] ♪
♪
♪ [flute joins
the viola] ♪
♪
KIK.
AUNT CORRIE.
ALL THESE NUMBERS. . .
WHAT DO THEY MEAN?
OH, DIFFERENT THINGS,
INSTRUCTIONS MOSTLY.
INSTRUCTIONS FOR WHAT?
WELL, THERE COULD BE
A PILOT DOWN SOMEWHERE.
THE NUMBERS COULD BE COORDINATES
FOR PICKING HIM UP. . .
OR MAYBE FOR BLOWING UP
A NAZI SUPPLY TRAIN!
THINGS LIKE THAT.
SABOTAGE?
(pensively)
WE COULD HAVE BLOOD
ON OUR HANDS.
♪
FOR HOLLAND.
DOES THAT
MAKE IT RIGHT?
LYING, STEALING,
KILLING?
WHATEVER HELPS
HOLLAND IS RIGHT.
I NEED THE MESSAGE AUNT CORRIE,
THEY'RE WAITING.
♪
WHAT WILL WE BE LIKE
WHEN THIS IS OVER?
♪
[gulls squawking]
[engine rumbling]
[bang!]
[people chattering]
[knock, knock]
MISS TEN BOOM?
YEAH!
THANK YOU FOR
BEING SO PROMPT.
I HAVE HEARD A GREAT DEAL
ABOUT YOU. . .
ABOUT YOUR WORK.
I'M AFRAID IT'S
MY FATHER'S WORK.
NOT THE WATCHMAKING.
[click]
♪ [German patriotic
music plays] ♪
YOUR OTHER WORK.
YOU MEAN WITH
THE CHILDREN?
WE'VE HAD TO
DISBAND THE CLASS.
MISS TEN BOOM,
MANY OF US WHO ARE
IN NO POSITION TO
PUBLICIZE OUR FEELINGS,
ARE IN GREAT SYMPATHY
WITH WHAT YOU'RE DOING.
♪
PEOPLE CALL YOUR HOUSE
"GOD'S UNDERGROUND."
♪
ARE YOU TRYING TO
TRAP ME, SIR?
USING THE NAME OF THE LORD
IS NOT THE WAY.
IF IT WERE A TRAP,
YOU WOULD BE DOWN THE HALL
TALKING WITH THE GESTAPO.
THIS WILL GO NO FURTHER.
THEN WHY DID YOU
SEND FOR ME?
♪
I WANT YOU. . .
TO PASS THIS MAN'S NAME
ON TO YOUR FRIENDS.
♪
WHO IS HE?
A BUSINESSMAN.
HE BETRAYS PEOPLE
TO THE GESTAPO.
THE GOING RATE IS
75 GUILDERS A HEAD.
JUST PASS IT ALONG. . .
THEY'LL TAKE CARE OF HIM.
♪
IF I COULD DO
WHAT YOU ASK,
IT WOULD BE THE SAME
AS KILLING HIM MYSELF.
I CAN ONLY PUT HIM
IN THE HANDS OF THE LORD,
AND ASK THE LORD
TO REACH HIS HEART.
♪
[deep sigh]
YOU DO THAT, MISS TEN BOOM.
♪
[thunder crashing]
[floorboards creaking]
[thunder rumbles]
(Eusie)
THE DEMONS ARE OUT TONIGHT.
I WOULD ASSUME YOU COULD
SLEEP THROUGH ANYTHING.
SOME TEA?
THANK YOU.
[thunder rumbles
in the distance]
YOU KNOW, MISS TEN BOOM,
YOU AND I ARE VERY MUCH ALIKE.
STUBBORN. . .TOUGH. . .
DETERMINED.
YOU STILL DON'T DO
YOUR SHARE OF THE WORK.
WE ARE THE SAME, YES.
BUT I AM MORE SO. . .
SO. . .I WIN!
DID YOU KNOW THAT. . .
I HAVE A WIFE AND SMALL SON?
PRECISELY-- I DO NOT CHOOSE
TO EXPOSE MYSELF.
THEY GOT AWAY.
[thunder rumbling]
AT LEAST I. . .
THINK THEY DID.
I WILL NOT GO AROUND
LIKE THE OTHERS,
BEGGING FOR SYMPATHY
AND REASSURANCE.
WE KNOW SO LITTLE
ABOUT EACH OTHER.
YOU BUSY YOURSELF
WITH OUR NEEDS.
SURELY YOU HAVE SOME
NEEDS OF YOUR OWN.
IT'S PEOPLE LIKE US,
MISS TEN BOOM. . .
RAGING TORRENTS BEHIND
THE STUBBORN JAW.
NO TORRENTS.
[thunder rumbles]
YOU MIGHT SAY MY LIFE
HAS BEEN. . .BORING.
UNTIL ALL THIS?
UNTIL ALL THIS.
WAS MARRIAGE NEVER CONSIDERED
FOR THE DAUGHTERS TEN BOOM?
BETSIE WAS ALWAYS UNWELL.
SHE WAS TOLD SHE
COULD NOT BEAR CHILDREN,
SO SHE CHOSE NOT TO MARRY.
AND YOU?
♪ [oboe playing] ♪
I HAD A YOUNG MAN,
♪♪
BUT I WAS NOT CUT FROM FINE
ENOUGH CLOTH FOR HIS FAMILY.
♪♪
I LACKED GRACE.
STILL. . .
I WAS THE FIRST WOMAN
TO BE LICENSED
A WATCHMAKER IN HOLLAND.
[chuckling]
♪♪
AND YOU HAVE YOUR FATHER,
AND YOU HAVE YOUR RELIGION.
IS IT ENOUGH?
MORE THAN ENOUGH.
GOD HAS BEEN GOOD TO ME.
YES, I. . .
I THINK HE HAS.
♪♪
AND I THINK I SHALL BE
GOING BACK TO MY BED.
I WILL PRAY FOR YOUR FAMILY.
♪♪
DON'T THINK YOU WILL GET ME TO
PEEL POTATOES, MISS TEN BOOM.
[many clocks ticking]
[doorbell tinkling]
[ticking]
[ticking of many clocks]
GOOD MORNING.
MISS TEN BOOM?
YEAH?
MY NAME IS VOGEL. . .
JAN VOGEL.
I CAME ALL THE WAY
FROM ERMELO.
DO YOU HAVE A WATCH
THAT NEEDS REPAIR?
I NEED 600 GUILDERS.
I'VE HEARD YOU
HAVE CERTAIN CONTACTS.
I DON'T UNDERSTAND.
IT'S MY WIFE. . .
SHE'S BEEN ARRESTED.
SHE'S JEWISH.
(sniffles)
THAT'S A LOT OF MONEY.
THERE'S A POLICEMAN
WHO'LL ARRANGE EVERYTHING
FOR 600 GUILDERS. . .
AND THEN SHE'LL NEED
A PLACE TO HIDE.
WHAT NOW?
SOMEBODY'S CALLING FOR THIS
WITHIN THE HOUR.
A MR. JAN VOGEL.
HE'S FROM ERMELO.
HIS WIFE'S BEEN TAKEN.
IT'S FOR A BRIBE.
OH. . .YOU ARE IMPOSSIBLE.
NOW HERE. . .
I'LL TAKE CARE OF IT.
NOW WILL YOU PLEASE
GO TO BED.
BUT WILLEM AND
TINE ARE COMING.
YOU CAN COME DOWN LATER.
BE SURE AND CALL ME.
I WILL.
AND USE THE
STEAM KETTLE!
YEAH, YEAH.
[low hissing]
[deep, irregular breathing]
[soft moaning]
I THOUGHT THAT TODAY
THE LORD WOULD HAVE US
READ FROM ROMANS,
CHAPTER 8.
"WHAT THEN CAN SEPARATE US
FROM CHRIST'S LOVE?
CAN HARDSHIP OR CALAMITY?
CAN PERSECUTION OR ABUSE?
IF WE ARE HUNGRY OR POOR,
OR IN DANGER, OR THREATENED
WITH DEATH.
DOES THAT MEAN THAT GOD
HAS DESERTED US?
NO! DESPITE ALL THIS,
WE HAVE OVERWHELMING VICTORY
THROUGH CHRIST WHO LOVES US.
FOR I AM CONVINCED
THAT NEITHER DEATH
NOR LIFE NOR THE
POWERS OF HEAVEN,
NOR THE POWERS OF HELL ITSELF
CAN KEEP GOD'S LOVE FROM US.
NOTHING IN THE WORLD
AS IT IS. . .
[engine racing]
OR THE WORLD AS IT SHALL BE,
IN THE FORCES OF THE UNIVERSE.
[loud rumbling]
. . .IN ALL CREATION WILL EVER
BE ABLE TO SEPARATE US.
(soldier)
AROUND THE SIDE DOOR.
COME ON!
[doorbell rings]
[buzzer blasts]
(woman shouting)
GET UPSTAIRS.
♪ [orchestra plays
heavy, minor chords] ♪
♪
[doorbell rings]
CORRIE!
[shuffling and gasping]
[doorbell ringing
rapidly]
YES, I'M SORRY WE'RE
CLOSED UNTIL 2:OO.
MISS TEN BOOM, I. . .I HAVE AN
APPOINTMENT WITH YOUR SISTER.
MR. AH, VOGEL?
I NEED THE MONEY.
NOW!
YES, OF COURSE,
I'LL GET IT.
PLEASE, MISS TEN BOOM!
PLACES, EVERYONE!
(Eusie)
COME ON, HURRY!
PLEASE, MISS TEN BOOM!!!
YES, YES IN A MOMENT!!!
I'M JUST COLLECTING IT!
[loud, frantic knocking]
[loud smashing]
OH!!!
(man)
STAY HERE!
I'LL TAKE THE TOP.
MISS TEN BOOM?
TEN BOOM. . .
ELIZABETH.
[click]
[softly groaning]
[slam!!]
WHERE DO YOU HIDE
YOUR RATION CARDS?
I DON'T KNOW WHAT
YOU'RE TALKING ABOUT.
[swack!]
NO!!!!
WHERE ARE THE JEWS?
WHAT JEWS?
[swak!!!]
(crying)
OH! LORD JESUS, HELP ME!
AAAHHHH.
[Corrie crying]
WHERE ARE THE JEWS?
[swack!!!!]
NO, PLEASE.
(soldier)
WHERE IS THE SECRET ROOM?
[loud clatter]
[soldier speaking in German,
makes comment about the "radio"]
(Betsie)
CORRIE!
THIS MUST STOP!!
THERE'S BEEN NO WRONG
DONE IN THIS HOUSE.
THEN WHAT ARE YOU DOING
WITH ALL THESE RATION CARDS,
FEEDING AN ARMY?
WHAT DOES IT SAY IN
THAT BOOK OF YOURS
ABOUT OBEYING THE GOVERNMENT?
HUM?
THERE COMES A TIME. . .
WHEN WE MUST CHOOSE
BETWEEN GOD AND MAN.
[loud crashing]
[soldiers talking
in German]
[extremely loud crashing]
[boom. . .boom]
[soldiers talking
in German]
[loud clunking]
HALT!!!!
[two loud gunshots]
[thud]
[rapid, shallow breathing]
[many clocks ticking]
♪ [strings play
in minor tones] ♪
♪
[gnashing of chains]
KEEP MOVING.
♪
(soldier)
NAM, BITTE?
CORNELIA. . .TEN BOOM.
ELIZABETH.
(soldier)
YOUR NAME?
TEN BOOM, CASPER.
♪
[grunting]
PAPA!
♪
(soldier)
ONLY SIX?
SEVEN. . .
GOD IS WITH US.
♪
TEN BOOM. . .
GIVE ME YOUR WORD
YOU WILL BEHAVE YOURSELF,
AND YOU CAN DIE
IN YOUR BED, OLD MAN,
WHERE YOU BELONG.
IF I STAY BEHIND,
I WILL OPEN MY DOOR TO
ANYONE WHO KNOCKS FOR HELP.
CLOSE IT UP.
[clunk]
♪
[softly sobbing]
SEAL THE HOUSE.
[heel click]
♪
[engine starts]
[soft cry]
[rumbling of engines]
♪ [orchestra swells
in intensity] ♪
♪
♪ [violin and harp play] ♪
♪ [cello playing
with intensity] ♪
♪
[engines roar]
[soldiers speaking in German]
(soldier)
CLEAR THE TRUCKS!
(soldiers yelling)
OUT! OUT!
OUT!!!
[many soldiers yelling commands
[woman giving commands
in German]
(Betsie)
CORRIE, TAKE MY HAND.
MY SISTER,
SHE NEEDS A DOCTOR.
MOVE ON!!
(Betsie)
PAPA! PAPA!!!
GOD BE WITH YOU PAPA!!
AND WITH YOU,
MY DAUGHTERS.
[click. . .clunk!]
[clattering]
[jingling of keys]
I HAVE TO GET IN THERE.
[soldier speaks in German]
[heavy jingling of keys]
[echoey clunk
of heavy metal]
FEVER DOWN?
YOU HAD THEM WORRIED. . .
TYPHUS.
YESTERDAY'S RATIONS,
I SAVED THEM FOR YOU.
LISTEN, I HAVE FAMILY HERE.
MY SISTER, MY BROTHER,
MY FATHER, MY NEPHEW--
THE TEN BOOM FAMILY.
CAN YOU FIND OUT
WHERE THEY ARE?
SSSSSHH!
MAYBE, LISTEN. . .
I CAN GET SOAP,
ASPIRIN, CIGARETTES.
YOU CAN PAY ME WHEN
YOU START GETTING MAIL.
SOAP, 25 GUILDERS;
ASPIRIN, 50; CIGARETTES, 100.
MOST ANYTHING!
CAN YOU GET ME A BIBLE?
[moaning]
[thunder rumbling]
[creaking]
[loud clanging]
[soldiers laughing]
[thunk!]
[creaking]
[Kik breathes rapidly]
IT'S KIK!
IT'S SAFE NOW.
(man)
OH, THANK GOD!
(Kik)
SSH! ON THE ROOF QUICKLY.
THE ROOF!
WHERE ARE YOUR FAMILY?
(Kik)
HURRY!
THE TEN BOOMS?
STILL IN PRISON.
THAT'S ALL WE
KNOW.
MAMA MADE THE COVERLET
ON MY BED. . .
IT WAS IN HER TROUSSEAU.
THE PAINTING
BY THE MIRROR IS A. . .
[gasps]
DO NOT GO!
STAY. . .PLEASE.
[clunk]
THEY THINK I HAVE
TO FEED YOU.
EVERYBODY'S BEEN RELEASED.
EVERYBODY?
EXCEPT YOUR SISTER BETSIE,
AND YOUR FATHER,
TOO, I THINK--
I'M NOT SURE.
OH, THANK YOU, LORD!
OH LORD, THANK YOU!
HERE'S YOUR BREAD FROM THE
WARDEN'S BAKERY. . .FRESH!
OH, LORD. . .
YOU HAVE DONE WONDERS.
DON'T I GET
A LITTLE CREDIT.
LORD, BLESS THIS ANGEL.
BLESS YOU!
DO YOU THINK
YOU CAN LAST HERE
DOING THAT?
PRAYING?
THE ONLY WAY
TO LIVE HERE. . .
IS TO HATE.
HATE CAN PUT YOU
IN A WORSE PRISON THAN THIS.
I HAVE BEEN 3 YEARS
IN THIS HOLE.
I WORKED MY WAY
TO A POSITION.
AND I LIVE TO GET
THE SWINE WHO BETRAYED ME.
NOW THAT'S 75 GUILDERS!
[loud clunk]
♪ [orchestra plays slowly
in melancholy tone] ♪
♪
♪ [strings & harp
play slowly and brightly] ♪
♪
[soldiers marching
in the distance]
ARE YOU COLD?
IT SEEMS REASONABLY PLEASANT.
I'M SORRY.
NOW YOU'RE HERE FOR VIOLATION
OF THE RATIONING RULES.
WOULD YOU MIND TELLING ME
WHERE YOU GOT
THESE EXTRA RATION CARDS?
SOMETIMES THEY JUST APPEARED.
WHAT DO YOU MEAN. . .
APPEARED?
PUSHED UNDER THE DOOR.
SOMETIMES THEY WERE HANDED TO ME
IN THE MARKET.
BY WHOM?
A MR. SMIT.
MR. JAN SMIT?
WILL YOU TELL ME ABOUT
YOUR OTHER ACTIVITIES?
MY SISTER AND I
HELD BIBLE CLASSES,
UNTIL SUCH MEETINGS
WERE FORBIDDEN.
AND WE WORKED WITH
RETARDED CHILDREN.
HOW?
EXCUSE ME?
HOW WOULD YOU
WORK WITH THEM?
WE TAUGHT THEM ABOUT GOD.
[loud, raspy cough]
WHAT A WASTE.
IF YOU WANTED CONVERTS,
SURELY ONE NORMAL PERSON
IS WORTH
ALL THE HALF-WITS
IN THE WORLD.
IN THE EYES OF GOD,
ONE SIMPLE CHILD
MAY BE WORTH MORE THAN. . .
. . .A WATCHMAKER'S DAUGHTER.
PERHAPS. . .
BUT I KNOW HE KEEPS ME
ALWAYS IN HIS SIGHT.
YOU ACTUALLY BELIEVE THAT?
I BELIEVE THAT YOU ARE
IN HIS SIGHT TOO, LIEUTENANT.
TELL ME, MISS TEN BOOM,
HOW CAN YOU BELIEVE
IN A GOD
WHO LETS AN OLD MAN
DIE IN PRISON?
HIS BODY FORGOTTEN SOMEWHERE
IN A PAUPER'S GRAVE.
MY FATHER?
I UNDERSTAND HE WAS TAKEN ILL
AFTER ABOUT 10 DAYS.
HE WAS TAKEN TO
A HOSPITAL IN THE HAAG,
UNFORTUNATELY, THERE WERE
NO BEDS AVAILABLE.
HE SEEMINGLY DIED
IN THE HALLWAY.
SOME FAILURE OF ORGANIZATION.
UNDER SUCH CIRCUMSTANCES
WHERE NO ONE CLAIMS THE BODY,
IT IS DIFFICULT TO TRACE.
I KNOW WHERE MY FATHER IS,
LIEUTENANT.
THAT WILL BE ALL,
MISS TEN BOOM.
OH, YOU HAVE
NEWS FROM HOME.
♪ [cello plays softly,
in minor tones] ♪
♪
♪ [oboe plays slow,
bright melody] ♪
♪
(whispering)
Papa. . .Papa.
♪
♪ [full orchestra plays] ♪
[loud, steady blast
of siren]
[soldiers yelling]
[loud, steady blast
of siren]
SNELL, SNELL, SNELL!!
[loud, steady blast
of siren]
[people exclaiming]
[siren]
[frantic yelling]
[whoosh, whoosh
of steam engine]
[frantic yelling]
[loud hiss
of rushing steam]
[loud din of soldiers
and people yelling]
(soldier)
SNELL, SNELL.
[loud yelling]
(Corrie)
BETSIE!! BETSIE!!
CORRIE, OH!!!!
IT'S MY SISTER!
BETSIE!
BETSIE!!!!
CORRIE!!!!
[soldiers commanding
and people yelling]
[CLUNK!!!]
[loud hissing
and chugging]
♪ [full orchestra plays
in slow, minor march tempo] ♪
♪
[steady chugging]
[steam whistle blows]
[loud rumbling]
♪
[loud hissing]
[people yelling]
[slow, powerful chugging]
♪
[fast, steady chugging]
[dogs growling]
[loud, shrill whistle]
[chugging & hissing]
[dog barking]
[soldiers giving commands]
SNELL!!!
SNELL!!
[people chattering]
[male and female
soldiers yelling]
[soldiers yelling]
[dog barking]
(male soldier)
SNELL!
[soldier barking command]
[dog barking]
[loud splashing]
[soldiers commanding
and dog barking]
[dog barking]
[people chattering]
[soldier commanding]
[people talking
in loud, frenetic tones]
[woman yelling]
(man on public address)
NOBODY IS PERMITTED TO KEEP
ANY PERSONAL POSSESSION.
THERE WILL BE NO EXCEPTIONS.
[frantic yelling]
REMOVE YOUR CLOTHES. . .
I CAN'T!
THEY'RE TAKING
EVERYTHING.
WHAT HE'S ASKED US TO DO,
HE'LL HELP US TO DO.
DO YOU WANT US TO
DIE FOR A LITTLE
SKIN?
I CAN'T.
THERE WILL BE NO EXCEPTIONS.
WHERE ARE YOU GOING?
TOILETS, PLEASE!
SHOWERS-- USE THE DRAIN HOLES.
PLEASE UNDERSTAND,
SHE'S BEEN VERY ILL.
[people yelling]
(man)
NAME?
BRIDGET MARIE.
PRIEST, FRANCES.
[frenetic yelling]
QUICK, TAKE OFF
YOUR SWEATER.
HURRY!
THEY'LL SEND US
BACK HERE AFTER WE SHOWER.
I CAN'T!
YES, YES,
YOU CAN. HURRY!
[frenzied, frenetic yelling]
DANKE!
[splashing]
[crying]
[yelling]
[rrriiipp]
(woman)
I GOT MY SHOES!
HOW MUCH
FOR UNDERWEAR?
A WEEK'S BREAD RATION.
(man)
NEXT!
NEXT!!
OH, LORD. . .
YOU HAVE GIVEN US YOUR WORD
AND HIDDEN IT THROUGH
EVERYTHING!
NOW OPEN UP A WAY FOR US TO GET
IT THROUGH THE GATES OF HELL.
(man)
ACHTUNG! ACHTUNG!
IT'S IN GOD'S HANDS NOW.
[soldier barking orders]
NEXT.
NAME?
DE GREUTH, ALISA!
CLASSIFICATION.
POLITICAL.
NEXT.
NEXT!!!
NAME!!
YEDMUELLE, GRACE.
CLASSIFICATION?
CRIMINAL.
NEXT!
TEN BOOM, ELIZABETH.
CLASSIFICATION?
AH, POLITICAL.
NEXT!!
TEN BOOM, CORNELIA.
CLASSIFICATION?
POLITICAL.
NEXT.
NEXT!!!
BERTE, LIZA.
CLASSIFICATION.
POLITICAL.
NEXT!
CLASSIFICATION.
[frenzied yelling
in the distance]
[loud screaming]
[soldiers commanding]
[screaming]
[yelling]
[crack. . .crack]
[frenzied yelling
in the distance]
[clunking of metal]
[frenetic yelling & chattering]
TEN BOOM, OVER HERE!
[yelling]
THE HELL YOU DO!
FLEAS!
LICE!
CAN YOU IMAGINE
WHAT MAMA WOULD SAY?
(soldier)
ACHTUNG! ACHTUNG!
(woman)
RAVENSBRUCK IS NOT A REST CAMP.
ROLL CALL, 4:30 EVERY MORNING.
[woman gasps]
. . .7 DAYS A WEEK.
TOMORROW, ASSIGNMENT
TO WORK DETAILS.
THOSE WHO CANNOT WORK
REPORT TO SICK CALL. . .
(in sinister tone)
AND THEY BETTER BE SICK!
YOU WILL RECEIVE
1/2 POUND OF BREAD
AND 1/2 LITER
OF SOUP PER DAY.
ONE SMALL OBSERVATION
UPON WHICH YOUR LIFE DEPENDS--
THERE IS ONLY ONE ROAD
TO FREEDOM. . .
WORK!
♪ [cello plays slowly
in minor tone] ♪
♪
GET IT UP!
HOIST IT.
♪
[barking orders]
SNELL!.
♪
[soldier commands Betsie]
SNELL!!
♪
[jingling]
[click]
YOU ARE DUTCH?
SOME OF MY PEOPLE
ARE DUTCH. . .
ON MY MOTHER'S SIDE.
YOU ARE NOT THE ONLY ONE
SURPRISED TO BE HERE.
I THOUGHT I WOULD BE WORKING AT
A RELOCATION CENTER. . .
REFUGEES.
[dog barks
in the distance]
[clattering of
cabinet door]
THE SUPPLIES ARE
EXTREMELY LIMITED.
AN ACCURATE RECORD IS ESSENTIAL
I KNOW MY WAY
AROUND HOSPITALS,
I WAS KIND OF NURSE ONCE.
I ASSUME THAT IS WHY
YOU WERE ASSIGNED HERE.
A MIDWIFE. . .
I BROUGHT JEWISH BABIES
INTO THE WORLD.
YOU ARE NEVER TO TOUCH
THE THINGS IN HERE:
SOAP, VITAMINS, PAINKILLERS,
YEAST, QUININE.
I HAVE THE ONLY KEY
TO THIS CUPBOARD.
[click]
HOWEVER. . .
YOU WILL FIND THAT I OFTEN
FORGET TO LOCK UP.
I HOPE YOU UNDERSTAND, 66685.
[clanking and soft chattering]
[happy chattering]
OH. . .THANK YOU, LORD!
HE DOESN'T EXPECT
THANKS FOR THIS.
IT'S WARM.
I'M THANKFUL FOR EVERY MOMENT WE
CAN BE TOGETHER.
YEAH!
WE CAN AT LEAST
LIE DOWN TONIGHT.
THERE HAS TO BE
A PLAN, CORRIE.
I WON'T BE GRATEFUL
FOR THE LICE.
GOD DOESN'T MAKE MISTAKES.
HOW IS IT
AT THE HOSPITAL?
IS IT TRUE YOUR
TEMPERATURE HAS TO BE
OVER 104 TO BE ADMITTED?
THAT'S THE RULE.
THERE'S A GUARD
IN THE LAUNDRY.
YOU CAN GET UNDERWEAR
FOR A PRICE.
WHAT DOES SHE
WANT?
BREAD RATIONS.
DON'T CUT
TOO MUCH!
WHAT DO YOU WANT,
HAIR OR LICE!?
YOU'LL LEARN TO LOVE
THE LITTLE DARLINGS.
THE GUARDS WON'T STEP FOOT
IN THIS LICE PIT.
PAST THE DOOR,
WE CAN DO ANYTHING.
EVEN LICE!
[loud blast
of siren]
[siren blasting
and guard commanding]
and dog barking]
[siren blasting
and guard commanding]
[guard talking loudly]
[siren blasting]
[dog barking]
(guard)
6-6-7-2-7.
6-6-7-2-7!
6-6-7-2-7 IS MISSING!!
♪ LA, LA, LA, LA, ♪
♪ LA, LA,
LA, LA. ♪
(woman)
HERE!!!
[screaming]
[woman being whipped;
crying and screaming]
SOMEBODY OVERSLEPT.
THE LOONY.
[guard yelling and whipping
and woman wailing]
OH, CORRIE. . .
WE ARE IN HELL!
[loud cracks
and screams]
[Hitler speaking in German
over the PA system]
[loud roar of applause
and cheers]
(Corrie)
WHY DO THEY KEEP US SO LONG?
TO BREAK US.
[Hitler speaking]
(Corrie)
BETSIE, LOOK!
[Hitler speaking]
I WAS CERTAIN NO ONE WOULD DIE,
THAT WE WOULD ALL GO HOME.
THOSE DAYS ON THE TRAIN--
THE LORD SEEMED TO PROMISE.
(crying)
HOW COULD I HAVE MISUNDERSTOOD?
(Betsie)
OH, DEAR FATHER, HELP ME.
DON'T LET ME LISTEN TO MY VOICE
AND THINK IT IS YOURS!
(crying)
OH JESUS. . .
SHOW ME HOW TO LIVE
IN THIS PLACE.
YOU TOO LOVE HIM?
[female guard yells]
[breathes deeply]
[clunk]
[click]
[slam]
HERE, PUT THESE
IN THE MATTRESS.
NOT NOW! IT'S YEAST,
AND DON'T GO
SPOONING IT AROUND.
I CAN NEVER GET
ENOUGH FOR EVERYBODY.
[women pleasantly conversing]
THIS METHOD CONSISTED OF
PAINTING ONLY SMALL DOTS
OF PURE COLORS ON THE CANVAS.
AND COLOR BLENDING WAS ACHIEVED
BY PLACING DOTS OF DIFFERENT
COLORS NEXT TO EACH OTHER.
AND THEN FROM A DISTANCE
THE TWO COLORS APPEARED BLENDED
INTO ONE SINGLE NEW COLOR.
(woman)
JESUS CHRIST HAS
MADE IT POSSIBLE
FOR US TO HAVE
DIRECT ACCESS.
[many pleasant conversations]
THERE'S A REPEAT
AT THAT POINT.
IN THE SECOND MOVEMENT?
THAT IS A RETARDONDO
AT THE END OF THE THIRD BAR.
♪ DA. . .DA DA-DA ♪
(women singing)
♪ STAND UP FOR JESUS ♪
♪ YE SOLDIERS
OF THE CROSS. ♪
♪ LIFT HIGH
HIS ROYAL BANNER. . . ♪
YOU'RE QUITE
WRONG,
THE RETARDNDO IS
LATER.
♪ . . .IT MUST NOT
SUFFER LOSS ♪
(male soldier) SILENCE!!
[stomps on floor] SILENCE!!!
[women loudly talking]
NO ROOM. NO ROOM! NO ROOM!!!
(all chant)
NO ROOM! NO ROOM!!
[loud banging
of utensils]
[banging subsides]
YOU FIND ROOM.
[loud yelling]
(female soldier)
SEIG HEIL!
GERMAN WHORES. . .
WE RAN THEM THROUGH
THE HOSPITAL. . .
INFECTED.
WHAT'S WITH
THE YELLOW BADGE?
(woman with British accent)
RACE DEFILER. . .
CAUGHT HER
WITH A SLAVIC LABORER.
(whispers)
She's just a child.
[guard yelling
and whip cracking]
[clattering]
OH. . .YOU'VE TROD
ON MY FOOT.
OH!
[soldiers conversing in German]
[clattering]
(female guard)
SNELL, SNELL.
[guard yelling]
(male soldier)
DON'T EXERT YOURSELF, COUNTESS.
OH, IT'S ALL
I CAN CARRY.
ANY MORE, AND I'LL HAVE
TO STOP ALTOGETHER.
I DECIDE WHO STOPS!
OH! OH, OH! OH!
[Betsie shrieking]
[loud crack!]
OH, OH!
OH! OH! oh!
[Betsie crying]
I DECIDE WHO STOPS.
[groaning]
NO!
[Betsie groaning]
NO HATE, CORRIE. . .
NO HATE.
[Corrie crying]
I WANT THE
MOST WARM VEST.
YOU OWE
2 DAY'S BREAD!!
I. . .I CAN PAY
YOU NEXT WEEK.
NO!
[thunk!. . .splat]
(Katje)
OH! DUMPKOPFF.
(Betsie talking softly)
JESUS KNOWS
EVERYTHING WE FEEL.
HE PROMISED THAT WHEN 2 OR 3
GET TOGETHER IN HIS NAME,
HE WOULD BE THERE
WITH THEM. . .
EVEN IN RAVENSBRUCK!
IN OUR LIVES BEFORE,
WE WOULD HAVE BEEN
SEPARATED BY SO MUCH;
BUT HERE, ALL THAT
HAS BEEN STRIPPED AWAY.
AND WE SEE THE TRUTH:
JESUS IN EACH ONE OF US;
LIGHT IN THIS DARKNESS. . .
AND WE CAN
PRAISE HIM TOGETHER.
[all whisper in prayer]
(Betsie)
FATHER. . .
BLESS THE GERMAN PEOPLE.
FROM YOUR GREAT
STOREHOUSE OF LOVE,
FORGIVE THEM FOR JESUS' SAKE.
DO NOT HOLD THIS PLACE
TO THEIR CHARGE,
FORGIVE THEM, EVEN BEFORE
THEY KNOW TO ASK.
♪ [flute plays
with strong melody] ♪
♪
I'LL GIVE
YOU ONE.
TWO--OR ELSE YOU DON'T
WANT THE SCARF!
[splashing]
I'LL GIVE YOU ONE
NOW, ONE TOMORROW.
I'LL FIND YOU.
♪
[loud clanking]
[grunting]
[sloshing]
[loud clanking]
(woman)
COME ON NOW, RUB IT!
RUB IT IN!
(Katje)
A WHOLE TRANSPORT OF POLES CAME
IN LAST NIGHT.
VULTURE.
YOU SHOULD KNOW.
I HAVE AN UNDERVEST.
EYES FRONT!
IT IS WOOL.
NO!!
TWO DAYS' BREAD RATION.
MY COMB.
I'LL COLLECT
LATER.
NOTHING FOR THE COMB.
RUB HARD!
RUB IT IN.
THANK YOU.
OH!. . .
THE SKY IS
SO PEACEFUL.
[sighs]
YOU POLITICALS DON'T HAVE
ANYTHING TO DO WITH TRASH.
AH!
[chuckles]
WE ARE ALL TRASH.
[male soldier yelling]
I TOOK IT OFF A TRAY. . .
IN THE INFIRMARY.
[very loud banging]
OH!!
[loud scream]
AAAAAH!
AAAAAHHH!
CONTINUE-- CONTINUE!
OOOOOHH!
[intense scream]
[soft wimpering
and sniffling]
I THOUGH YOU WERE SMART.
OOOOOHH!
AAAHHH!!
YOU CALLED ATTENTION
TO YOURSELF IN THE LINE.
[loud moan]
IMBECILE!
COULD YOU NOT WAIT UNTIL
YOU WERE BACK IN THE BLOCK?
ARE YOU SUCH A GREEDY FOOL?
YOU GERMAN COW!!!
MAYBE I SHOULD HAVE
LET THEM KILL YOU.
YOU GREAT. . .
LUMBERING. . .HUN!!!
MAYBE YOU'D LIKE
TO GO IN THE BOX.
BOX!!
NO LIGHT,
NO WATER.
YOU WILL NEVER DO ANYTHING
THAT STUPID AGAIN.
NEVER!
OOOOoooohhhh. . .
NOW I WILL. . .
I WILL DRESS YOUR HAND.
[gasping]
"COMFORT THE FRIGHTENED,
HELP THE WEAK,
BE PATIENT WITH EVERYONE.
DO NOT REPAY EVIL FOR EVIL,
BUT ALWAYS TRY TO DO
GOOD TO ONE ANOTHER.
ALWAYS REJOICE.
PRAY CONSTANTLY,
GIVE THANKS IN ALL
CIRCUMSTANCES,
FOR THIS IS THE WILL OF GOD
IN JESUS CHRIST.
AND TO THE MINDLESS,
THE WORDS SOUND SO COMFORTING.
IN THIS PLACE IT'S MOCKERY!
GOD DIDN'T MAKE THIS PLACE. . .
MEN DID!
BUT HE HAS POWER. . .
SURELY HE COULD STOP THEM.
UNLESS, OF COURSE,
HE'S A SADIST.
NO! HE'S LOVE, ALL LOVE.
THEN HE'S IMPOTENT.
YOU CAN'T HAVE IT
BOTH WAYS, MY DEAR!
YOU SEE WHAT'S AROUND YOU.
WE SEE ANOTHER WORLD,
JUST AS REAL. . .
OUR LIFE WITH GOD.
EVERY DAY IT GETS
DEEPER AND STRONGER.
YOU THINK THE TWO CAN'T
EXIST SIDE BY SIDE,
BUT WE KNOW THEY DO!
WE LIVE THEM BOTH!
IT'S ENOUGH KNOWING
THAT WE'RE SO MUCH DUNG,
MOVING FROM NOTHING TO NOTHING.
BUT YOU MUST BELIEVE YOUR GOD
SMELLS THAT STENCH
FROM THOSE CHIMNEYS
AND REFUSES TO DO ANYTHING!
IF ONLY. . .YOU COULD
KNOW HIS LOVE.
[breathing anxiously]
I AM MARIA WROCHEK. . .
FIRST VIOLINIST OF THE
WARSAW SYMPHONY ORCHESTRA.
DID YOUR GOD WILL THIS?
WE CANNOT ANSWER.
ALL I CAN SAY IS THAT
THE SAME GOD YOU ARE ACCUSING
CAME AND LIVED IN THE MIDST
OF OUR WORLD.
HE WAS BEATEN. . .
AND HE WAS MOCKED
AND HE DIED ON A CROSS.
AND HE DID IT FOR LOVE. . .
FOR US.
AND WHY DO YOU THINK
YOUR GOD OF LOVE
SENT YOU HERE?
TO OBEY HIM. . .
IF YOU KNOW HIM. . .
YOU DON'T HAVE TO KNOW WHY.
FIRST YOU TAKE THE
JUICE OF FOUR ORANGES,
AND A HALF A PINT
OF CREAM,
AND A CUP
OF SUGAR.
I ONLY USE 3/4 OF A CUP.
YOU SHOULD USE
A FULL CUP.
THEN YOU PUT THE PEELS
ASIDE FOR GRATING,
AND YOU WHIP THE CREAM.
WHAT KIND OF COOK ARE YOU?
YOU FORGOT THE EGGS.
DO YOUR OWN
RECIPE, THEN.
WE NEED
MORE SAND.
CORRIE. . .
DON'T SHUT
ME OUT. . .
PLEASE.
YOU KNOW YOU CAN
ONLY GIVE IT TO JESUS.
DO YOU THINK
I HAVEN'T PRAYED?
BUT I HATE THEM.
I HATE EVERY NAZI
IN THIS PLACE!
WE CAN'T BE MORE
THAN WHAT WE ARE.
ONLY JESUS CAN FREE
US FROM OURSELVES;
FROM WHATEVER
HAPPENS.
SISTER. . .YOU
CAN'T PROTECT ME.
YOU MUSTN'T TRY.
[Corrie wimpering]
[Corrie crying]
LORD. . .
I CANNOT
LET GO OF IT.
TAKE THIS HATE. . .
OUT OF MY LIFE
AND PUT YOUR LOVE
IN ITS PLACE.
JESUS, THERE ARE MANY THINGS
I DO NOT UNDERSTAND.
DO NOT LET ME GO MAD. . .
POKING ABOUT ON MY OWN.
YOU KNOW WHAT I AM.
SAVIOUR. . .
HIDE ME IN THE CENTER
OF YOUR WILL.
♪ [flute plays
slowly and melodically] ♪
♪
HOW LONG?
FOUR MONTHS.
WHAT'S IT TO YOU?
CHILD. . .
YOU WOULD LIKE TO SEE ME CRY,
WOULDN'T YOU?
THEN YOU COULD MOTHER ME.
I ONLY WANT TO HELP.
WHAT DIFFERENCE WOULD IT MAKE?
EVERYTHING DIES HERE.
KRAUT! A LOUSY
LITTLE WHORE!
WE NEED VITAMINS AND ALL THE
CALCIUM YOU CAN GET.
YOU ARE
SO DAMNED NAIVE.
TWO YEARS OLDER-- SHE'D BE
STANDING OVER YOU WITH A WHIP!
IT'S A BABY, KATJE,
A NEW LIFE!
I AM NOT
YOUR PERSONAL RED CROSS!
I CAN NEVER GET ENOUGH FOR YOU,
AND HER, AND BETSIE TOO!
WHAT ARE YOU DOING!?
NOTHING! I WAS JUST. . .
I SAID "WHAT
WERE YOU DOING?"
WE HAVE A PREGNANCY IN 28.
A KID OF 18.
SHE'S. . .
I DO NOT WANT TO KNOW!
ALL PREGNANCIES ARE
TRANSFERRED TO EXPERIMENTAL.
[click]
[engine idling]
[yelling]
YEAST, B VITAMINS.
IT'LL HELP KEEP YOUR SOUP DOWN.
WE EVEN HAVE A MIDWIFE.
[women conversing]
(man on PA)
GOUP 5, 100 WOMEN,
REPORT TO THE INSPECTOR.
PRISONER 146723
REPORT TO ADMINISTRATION
FOR PROCESSING.
[coughing]
ALL THIS GERMAN SLOP HAS TO BE
GOOD FOR SOMETHING.
GERMAN PAPERS,
THICK. . .
LIKE GERMAN HEADS!
IT'S A LOT OF HOT AIR!
THE YANKS ARE HALFWAY
TO THE RHINE.
OH! SO. . .
WE'LL PUT SOME HOT AIR
BETWEEN YOU AND THE WIND.
(Erika)
KATJE, THANK YOU!
[crinkling of paper]
IT'S FUNNY
ABOUT YOU TWO.
OH, WELL
TELL US. . .
WE NEED A LAUGH!
YOU'RE ALWAYS TALKING
ABOUT LOVE.
I BET NEITHER OF YOU
EVER HAD A MAN.
WE HAD BOYFRIENDS.
DID YOU LOVE YOUR
BABY'S FATHER?
I WAS HUNGRY.
HE WAS NICE TO ME.
[loud siren blasting]
(Betsie)
I FEEL SO STRANGE.
I HURT!
I CAN'T.
WELL, TRY.
IT GOES LIKE WOOD.
OH, I AM SO WEAK!
THANK GOD--
HE IS STRONG.
KATJE, KATJE!
♪ [strings play
in minor tones] ♪
♪
[coughing]
[women conversing]
[soft clanking of utensils]
[coughing]
BETSIE, TRY. . .
PLEASE TRY.
YEAH.
OH. . .YOU KNOW, CORRIE,
WE'RE. . .
WE'RE GOING TO BE FREE!
BEFORE THE NEW YEAR--
BOTH OF US.
BOTH OF US?
THE LORD SHOWED ME. . .
IN A DREAM.
YOU'LL SEE!
(reassuringly)
I'M NOT GOING TO DIE, CORRIE.
OH. . .NO.
[loud blast of siren]
[shuffling]
FAR ENOUGH.
LEAVE HER THERE.
OH, PLEASE.
LEAVE HER!!
ALL PRISONERS REPORT
TO THE LAGERSTRASSE.
[siren blasting]
OH!
AH!!
[siren in the distance]
(with intensity)
PLEASE LET ME STAY WITH HER.
(yelling)
ROLL CALL!!
[crying]
[coughing]
[German patriotic music
playing over the PA]
[many women coughing]
(man)
BLOCK 41. . .DISMISSED.
♪
BLOCK 28. . .DISMISSED.
BLOCK 33. . .DISMISSED.
[many coughing]
BLOCK 35. . .DISMISSED.
♪
(Corrie)
BETSIE!!
(female soldier)
THE PRISONER IS BEING
TRANSFERRED TO THE HOSPITAL.
(Corrie)
PRISONER 66730
REQUESTS PERMISSION
TO ACCOMPANY HER SISTER.
WHAT IS THE COUNT?
BLOCK 20: 4 DEAD.
BLOCK 21: 3 DEAD.
BLOCK 22: 6 DEAD.
GO ON!
BLOCK 23: CLEAR.
THERE SHOULD BE MORE;
COUNT AGAIN.
BETSIE!
SISTER!
THANK HIM, CORRIE.
THANK THE LORD. . .
FOR ALL HE HAS DONE FOR US HERE
OH, YOU'LL
BE WARM SOON.
TOGETHER. . .YOU AND I. . .
ALWAYS TOGETHER.
YEAH!
♪ [cello plays
in minor tones] ♪
♪
[coughing]
[squeaking]
♪
WATER.
♪ [oboe plays
melody] ♪
♪
COULD I SLEEP HERE?
JUST TONIGHT?
IT'S SO COLD.
THIS WAY WE WOULD
HAVE 2 BLANKETS.
IF GOD LOVED BETSIE
SO MUCH. . .
WHY?
SUFFERING DOES NOT MEAN
THAT GOD HAS STOPPED LOVING US.
SOMETIMES. . .
WE HAVE TO ACCEPT THINGS
WE DO NOT UNDERSTAND.
I LOVE BETSIE. . .
AND I LOVE YOU!
[crying]
[strong wind blowing]
♪
[click]
(Katje)
THIS IS THE SISTER.
♪
CORRIE. . .
YOU MUST LOOK. . .
OTHERWISE, YOU'LL NEVER KNOW.
♪
[wimpering]
SHE'S BEAUTIFUL.
♪
BETSIE!
[crying]
(Betsie whispering)
We shall do
a great many things for others.
And we must go everywhere.
We must tell people
that no pit is so deep. . .
that he is not deeper still.
They will believe us. . .
because we were here.
BETSIE TALKED ABOUT HEAVEN
LIKE SHE HAD
ALREADY BEEN THERE.
YEAH!
NO ONE WOULD WISH
HER BACK.
READ FOR BETSIE.
READ FOR ALL OF US.
[breathes deeply]
(Corrie)
"FOR WE KNOW
THAT OUR EARTHLY BODIES,
THOSE WE HAVE NOW,
WHICH WILL DIE--
MUST BE CHANGED
FOR OUR HEAVENLY BODIES,
WHICH WILL NOT DIE. . .
BUT LIVE FOREVER.
THEN THE SCRIPTURE
WILL BE FULFILLED:
DEATH IS SWALLOWED UP
IN VICTORY."
(Corrie, with much emotion)
SO MY DEAR ONES. . .
SINCE FUTURE VICTORY IS SURE,
BE STRONG, AND STEADY. . .
ALWAYS ABOUNDING
IN THE WORK OF THE LORD.
FOR WE KNOW THAT
OUR LABOR IN THE LORD
IS NOT IN VAIN. . .
AS IT WOULD BE
IF THERE WERE NO RESURRECTION.
[ripping]
AND THIS IS THE GOOD NEWS:
THAT CHRIST DIED
FOR OUR SINS
ACCORDING TO THE SCRIPTURES.
AND THAT HE ROSE AGAIN,
JUST AS THE PROPHETS HAD SAID.
FOR GOD SO LOVED THE WORLD THAT
HE GAVE HIS ONLY BEGOTTEN SON,
THAT ANYONE WHO BELIEVES IN HIM
SHALL NOT DIE. . .
BUT HAS ETERNAL LIFE!
[wind blowing]
[footsteps]
(male soldier)
HALT!
ACHTUNG!
THE FOLLOWING PRISONERS
WILL COME FORWARD
AND STAND BY
FOR SELECTION AND PICKUP:
6-6-7-0-0, 6-5-4-0-6,
6-6-7-1-8, 6-6-6-9-4. . .
(woman)
NO! SHE CANNOT WALK!
(soldier)
BRING HER!!
7-8-9-9-2.
(woman)
DIED LAST NIGHT!
6-6-7-3-0.
CORRIE. . .
WHAT YOU SAID, I WANT IT--
I WANT HIM.
THEN ASK.
I DON'T KNOW WHAT TO ASK FOR.
HE KNOWS. . .
JUST ASK!
. . .7-4-2-8-1.
[coughing]
7-6-0-3-1.
♪ [strings play
in bright tone] ♪
♪
GOD IS WITH YOU!
(Corrie as a
young girl) PAPA. . .
SLEEP WELL, CORRIE.
PAPA?
YES, CORRIE.
WHAT IS IT
LIKE TO DIE?
♪
WHEN YOU AND I
GO TO AMSTERDAM,
WHEN DO I GIVE YOU
YOUR TICKET?
JUST BEFORE WE
GET ON THE TRAIN.
SO WITH DEATH.
WHEN THE TIME COMES,
OUR WISE HEAVENLY FATHER
WILL GIVE YOU
ALL THE STRENGTH YOU NEED.
[clicking
of typewriter keys]
[soldiers speaking German]
PRISONER 66730,
TEN BOOM, CORNELIA.
[thunk!]
SENTENCE COMPLETED,
21st, 12, 44.
SIGN.
WHAT IS IT?
PRISONER CERTIFIES THAT
ALL TREATMENT RECEIVED
DURING HER IMPRISONMENT
HAS BEEN ADEQUATE AND HUMANE
AND THAT NO ACCIDENTS,
ILLNESSES, OR INJURIES HAVE
OCCURRED.
SIGN.
[typewriter keys clicking]
♪ [cello & strings play] ♪
♪
KOMMEN ZIE FRAULIEN,
KOMMEN ZIE!
♪ [full orchestra--
powerful in tone] ♪
♪
(Betsie)
You know, Corrie,
we are going to be free
before the new year.
We will. . .I know it!
♪
(Corrie)
YEARS LATER IT WAS LEARNED
MY RELEASE CAME
THROUGH A CLERICAL ERROR.
WHAT SOME MIGHT CALL
A "MISTAKE."
NOT LONG AFTER I WAS SET FREE,
WOMEN MY AGE WERE PUT TO DEATH.
YES. . .I AM CORRIE TEN BOOM,
IN MY 80s NOW.
SOME QUESTIONS REMAIN,
BUT THEY ARE NOT TO BE FEARED.
OUR HEAVENLY FATHER HOLDS
ALL THINGS IN HIS HANDS,
EVEN OUR QUESTIONS.
AS FOR MYSELF,
IN THE YEARS SINCE RAVENSBRUCK,
THE LORD HAS SENT ME
TO SOME 60 COUNTRIES.
AND I HAVE TOLD
TO ANYONE WHO WOULD LISTEN:
"NO PIT IS SO DEEP. . .
THAT HE IS NOT DEEPER STILL."
WITH JESUS. . .
EVEN IN OUR DARKEST MOMENTS,
THE BEST REMAINS. . .
AND THE VERY BEST IS YET TO BE!
I PROMISED MY SISTER
I WOULD TELL IT. . .
AND I TELL YOU!
♪♪
CAPTIONING BY ARMOUR CAPTIONING